Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
the start of another three-part
mini-series, this time on
“Tyrants Of The Roman Empire”.
In today’s episode, we’re going
to talk about the original
Roman despot, the bloodthirsty,
depraved, and ruthless Caligula.
In part two, we’ll talk about
one who wasn’t much better,
the emperor who supposedly
fiddled while Rome burned, Nero.
And in part three, we’ll
be looking at Commodus.
He might have been the son of Marcus
Aurelius, the “philosopher emperor”, but
his exploits as emperor, from claiming
to be Hercules reborn to fighting in the
ring as a gladiator, were not something
you’d find recommended in Meditations.
OK then, let's not waste a minute and
get right into the story of Caligula.
Perhaps you can think of a
dinner party you’ve been to where
someone around the table burst
out in uncontrollable laughter.
Once they composed themselves, perhaps
they revealed a joke they'd just
been told, or a funny story they had
just heard about someone they knew.
Others most probably joined in
the merriment, and the dinner
party continued as usual.
At one dinner party in ancient Rome,
hosted by the then-emperor, Caligula,
the host burst out in raucous laughter.
Nobody seemed to have told the
young emperor anything; nobody had
slipped over on a stray grape or
spilled the wine over someone’s head.
There was no obvious
cause for this outburst.
His consuls, who were sitting next to
him, asked him why he was laughing.
He turned and said, "What do you
suppose, except that at a single
nod of mine, both of you could
have your throats cut on the spot?"
We have no historical record of
what happened next, but presumably
a gulp from one consul, perhaps an
embarrassed laugh from the other.
“Haha, good joke. It was a joke, right?”
These two consuls, two of the
highest elected officials of the
Roman Empire, presumably knew
that Caligula was deadly serious.
A single wave of his hand or nod of his
head and anyone in Rome, no matter how
powerful, would be put to their death.
This was a man who revelled in
public humiliation, showed little
regard for human life, and held his
elected officials in utter disregard.
But it was not always this way,
or at least, if it was always his
character, he kept it well hidden.
To understand the tyranny of
Caligula’s reign as emperor, we
must go back to his birth, and
indeed, we must remind ourselves
of a little ancient Roman history.
As you may know, or remember from
our mini-series on ancient Rome three
years ago, the politics and structure
of ancient Rome can be broadly divided
into two: the Republic and the Empire.
The Republic officially ended in
27 BC, and Rome became an empire,
ruled by its first emperor, Augustus.
Augustus was a much-loved emperor,
but there was the problem of who
would succeed him after his death.
A problem, as you’ll see, that
crops up again and again and again
in the story of Ancient Rome.
Augustus had no biological children,
but there were several stepchildren
and grandchildren knocking about,
some more capable than others.
After much manoeuvring, he named his
stepson, Tiberius, as his heir on
the condition that Tiberius adopt his
nephew, Germanicus, as his own son,
so the title of emperor would pass
first to Tiberius, then to Germanicus.
In AD 14, Augustus died, and
Tiberius duly became emperor.
Now, Tiberius was not
exactly a people’s favourite.
He was stern, often absent from Rome,
and a man whose suspicious nature
only deepened as he grew older.
He was also sadistic and bloodthirsty,
and could certainly have appeared in a
mini-series on tyrants, were there not
others who were even more tyrannical.
Despite his relative unpopularity,
his rule did provide some stability,
and he would go on to rule from
AD 13 to AD 37, 23 years in total.
But with no direct heirs, all eyes
turned, yet again, to the next generation.
Here, there was a clear frontrunner:
Germanicus, Tiberius’ adopted son,
and by this point, a decorated young
man and accomplished military leader.
Germanicus was everything the Romans
admired: a brilliant general, a
charismatic leader, and — importantly
— the great-nephew of Augustus
himself, so he had that all-important
pedigree, the blood tie to Augustus.
What’s more, he was married
to a granddaughter of
Augustus, Agrippina the Elder.
Together, they formed what many
saw as the perfect imperial couple.
However, tragedy struck.
Germanicus, this heroic military
leader who seemed poised to become
the next emperor, died suddenly in
Syria in AD 19, at the age of 33.
There are rumours he was poisoned, perhaps
on Tiberius’ orders, or perhaps it was one
of the many bugs that could have proved
fatal for travelling soldiers back then.
In any case, he left behind
a widow and six children.
Among them was a boy named
Gaius Julius Caesar Germanicus.
But the soldiers had another name for him.
As a child, this boy would often
visit his father’s military camps
dressed in a tiny soldier’s outfit,
complete with little leather boots.
The soldiers nicknamed him “Little
Boots”, “Caligula” in Latin.
Although he is believed to have hated
the nickname as an adult, and never used
it himself, it stuck, and I’ll continue
to use it for the rest of this episode.
Now, after Germanicus’s death, his
widow openly accused Tiberius of murder,
which was not a particularly smart
thing to do, especially to an emperor
as malicious and sadistic as Tiberius.
She was banished, and she
eventually died of starvation.
Two of Caligula’s brothers were
either imprisoned or executed.
Caligula, however, survived.
And not only did he survive, but
when he was 19, he was brought
to live with Tiberius, in Capri,
just off the coast of Naples.
Now, Caligula knew what Tiberius
stood accused of: the murder of his
father, and he knew what Tiberius
had done to the rest of his family.
And on the island, he also saw what fate
awaited anyone who crossed the sadistic
emperor: being pushed off a high cliff
if they were lucky, and being slowly
tortured to death if they weren’t.
So, if Caligula did feel resentment
towards Tiberius, which was clearly
perfectly reasonable, he kept
those feelings locked up inside.
He flattered Tiberius; he never mentioned
his father once, and he learned how to
play the role of the obedient servant.
When Tiberius finally died in AD
37, Caligula was 24 years old.
Now, there are some rumours that Caligula
murdered Tiberius, with one account
having him suffocate the man with a
pillow, but these are unsubstantiated.
Tiberius was 77 years old, which was
a ripe old age at this time, and there
is simply no evidence to suggest it
was anything other than natural causes.
It was, of course, good news for Caligula.
Although he was relatively unknown
as an individual in Rome, and he had
little knowledge of the workings of
Roman politics or the Roman army, he
seemed like the obvious successor.
He was the son of the heroic general
Germanicus and the adopted grandson
of Rome’s first emperor, Augustus.
He seemed to embody a golden
future, a new chapter for Rome.
And, sure enough, he arrived in
Rome and was hailed as emperor.
The transition from unknown boy to
commander of the world’s most powerful
empire at the time was incredibly smooth.
And for the first few months of his
reign, Caligula seemed to live up to the
hopes and dreams of the people of Rome.
He threw vast gladiatorial games in
celebration, he honoured all of his
predecessors' last wishes, he gave
every citizen of Rome a cash payment,
and he made sure to double the cash
payment for the Praetorian guard,
the emperor’s personal armed unit.
He also made a big deal of publicly
destroying all of Tiberius’s written
records of suspected treachery
among the senators, symbolically
burning them, as if saying, “This
was the past, tomorrow is a new day”.
He even said that he hadn’t read them,
which would turn out to be a lie.
In any case, the first few months of
his rule were, as one contemporary
historian put it, a "Golden Age"
of happiness and prosperity.
But, seven months or so after becoming
emperor, he fell seriously ill.
It’s not clear what this illness was,
whether he caught it randomly or whether
he was poisoned in some way, but for
almost a month, he was at death’s door.
It looked like he could
have died at any moment.
This being ancient Rome, senators were
scurrying around making preparations,
both for the eventuality that he wouldn’t
recover and succumbed to his illness,
and that he would make a full recovery.
One politician, and man of noble
blood, Atanius Secundus, had what he
must have thought was a cunning idea.
He publicly pledged that he would
fight in the arena as a gladiator
if only Caligula recovered.
Presumably, he thought it
was a win-win situation.
If Caligula died, which seemed highly
probable, he could point at how dedicated
he had been to the emperor, and how he'd
been willing to fight and most probably
die in the arena for his cherished master.
And if Caligula made a full recovery,
he would hear of this pledge and be
so impressed by the man’s loyalty
that he would be richly rewarded.
Caligula did make a full recovery, but
it seems that after this return from
the brink of death, something changed.
He heard about the senator’s bold
promise to fight in the arena,
and told him, in no uncertain
terms, “ok then, get on with it”.
The man, who was not in great shape and
had never held a sword before, was duly
marched into the gladiatorial area and
mown down by a professional gladiator.
From that point on, the
honeymoon period of Caligula’s
reign was well and truly over.
The generous young emperor, the
son of Germanicus, the darling
of Rome, seemed to vanish.
What replaced him was a ruler
who seemed to revel in cruelty,
humiliation, and excess.
Executions became an
almost daily occurrence.
He would invite senators to dine
with him, serve them the finest
food, and then, at the height of the
feast, casually order their deaths.
He delighted in seeing people squirm.
Prisoners were executed
in front of him for sport.
Sometimes he would order people slowly
tortured, so he could watch their agony.
The Roman historian Suetonius even
claims he enjoyed watching executions
scheduled for his mealtimes as if it
were a form of light entertainment.
Then there were the humiliations.
Senators were forced to run for long
distances alongside his chariot, like
stable boys rather than statesmen.
And this was layered on top
of the sexual depravity.
He is said to have prostituted the wives
of noblemen, inviting senators and their
wives to banquets, then forcing the wives,
one by one, into side rooms, forcing them
to have sex with him and then describing
their performance in intimate detail,
publicly, in front of their husbands.
There are accounts of him
creating a brothel inside the
imperial palace, complete with
hundreds of women and young boys.
And when it wasn’t humiliation and
sexual depravity, he is also remembered
by historians as an ineffective
and cowardly leader of Rome.
One account has him marching his troops
northwards, as if to attack Great
Britain, but after lining his troops
up on the beach in Gaul, he orders
them to collect seashells instead
of continue their mission, declaring
these the “spoils of the ocean”.
To many, this became a perfect
image of his reign: playing at war
while humiliating Rome’s soldiers.
And then, perhaps most famously,
came his obsession with divinity.
Previous and subsequent emperors became
deified after death, but Caligula
demanded worship in his own lifetime.
He had temples erected to his own glory,
with priests appointed to offer sacrifices
to him as though he were Jupiter.
He appeared in public dressed
as Apollo, Mercury, even Venus,
the female goddess of love.
He reportedly once appeared in the
theatre dressed as Venus, complete
with wig and dress, delighting in the
outrage of Rome’s conservative senators.
He simply didn’t care what Roman high
society thought about him; he threw
money hand over fist at the Praetorian
guard and knew that this money assured
loyalty, and therefore protection.
Well, it did for a while, as
we’ll discover in a few minutes.
Protected by a seemingly loyal imperial
guard and with his ruthlessness against
political enemies well known, it seemed
there was nobody or nothing to stop him.
He spent lavishly, not just on
himself but on public projects.
He built pleasure-galleys to cruise the
Bay of Naples: vast ships with baths,
colonnades, banquet-halls and even vines.
In a lake just south of Rome,
Lake Nemi, he launched colossal
barges with marble flooring.
As a quick side note for the
seriously dedicated listeners among
you, you may remember these barges
from episode number 516, on the
history of underwater exploration.
Well done if so.
Anyway, back to Caligula.
At the start of AD 41, not even 4
years into his rule, clearly, some
people were thinking enough was enough.
On January 24th, AD 41, he was preparing
for a trip to Alexandria, in Egypt.
He had been doing one of his favourite
activities–watching gladiatorial games–and
was heading inside for a spot of lunch.
He had been told that there was a group
of young boys who were practising, and
could he come and spare a few words?
As he was about to address the boys,
two of his trusted Praetorian guards
pounced on him, stabbing him a total of
30 times in the neck, chest and genitals.
One report even has them
stripping and eating his flesh.
Caligula, “Little Boots”, was dead.
Now, as for the motivations behind this
assassination, there is no evidence
of a wide plot among senators for
moral grounds, for the purposes of
“saving Rome”, or anything like that.
One hypothesis is that
it was more personal.
The man who is said to have landed
the first blow, Cassius Chaerea, was
a brave and distinguished Praetorian,
but he was often teased by Caligula
for having a high-pitched voice,
and being effeminate in his manners.
So yes, Caligula might have been seriously
unhinged and utterly inappropriate as
a Roman emperor, but one theory is that
he was murdered for being a bully rather
than anything more strategic than that.
And on this note, much of what we know
about Caligula as a man and his reign
comes down to only a few sources that
were written decades after his death.
These were second, often third-hand
accounts, and there is little
way of verifying these claims.
The most famous example is one that
you might be surprised hasn’t come
up yet: that he “made his favourite
horse a senator”, and this is
an example of how insane he was.
Firstly, this isn’t historically
accurate, in that the historian recalling
it says that Caligula suggested that
he would make his horse a consul.
And secondly, it was almost
certainly a joke by Caligula, and
one that the historian didn’t get.
We know that Caligula loved playing
jokes and had a devilish sense of humour,
and it seems much more probable that
either he was planning on doing this to
ridicule his senators, or that he made
a passing comment along the lines of
“so and so is so useless that my horse
could govern better than they could”.
He wasn’t actually planning
to make his horse a senator.
So, to wrap things up, Caligula
met his end at the hands of the
men he thought he could trust.
And they didn’t just kill him; shortly
after he was killed, so too were his wife
and young daughter, in order to completely
eradicate all lines of succession.
Instead, his uncle, Claudius, was
made emperor, and he ruled for 13
years before the subject of the
next episode, Nero, took over.
As for Caligula, he didn’t even rule
for four years, but his name is forever
associated with cruelty, despotism, and
the perils of unchecked absolute power.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Caligula, the potential
golden boy turned sadistic killer.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I'd love to know what
you thought of this episode.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
As a reminder, this is part
one of a three-part mini-series
on the theme of Roman Tyrants.
Next up it’ll be Nero, and in
part three, it will be Commodus.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.